---
layout: post
title: Rake
categories: core-tools
---

# Overview

If you started with Ruby and you're still around a month later, you
should spend a couple of hours and learn the basics of Rake.

It's a venerable item in the Ruby toolkit, and if you haven't used
tools like `make` before you're in for a treat.

# Background

Rake describes itself as a *A make-like build utility for Ruby,* and
you might think it's limited to building "code," but that's not so.

That's just the beginning.

So long as you keep your mind open, and remember that it's Ruby under
the covers, you can keep using it to "build" "things" that have
nothing to do with code.

# Getting Started

To get going, watch these two videos from Jim Weirich, the inventor of
Rake:

* [Basic Rake by Jim Weirich at RailsConf 2012][basic-rake-video]
* [Power Rake by Jim Weirich at Gotham Ruby Conf 2012][power-rake-video]

These talks are well done, and a great investment of your time.

# Basically Good Things to Know

Once you've watched the videos, if you find yourself on a project
using Rake, you'll need to know about the tasks that are available to
you and where to find the source code behind them.

## What tasks exist?

* `rake -T` shows all described rake tasks

* `rake -T whatever` shows all described rake tasks beginning with
  whatever

* `rake -P` shows all rake tasks and their dependencies

* `rake -W whatever` shows where the tasks beginning with whatever are
  defined.

As a user of Rake, I am sometimes surprised by the notion that if a
task doesn't have a description, then it doesn't appear in the output
of `rake -T` or `rake -W`. One of these (`-T`) is intentional, while
the other (`-W`) is a bug, and will be fixed sooner or later. Just a
heads up.

## Where's the source?

The fastest way to get up to speed with Rake is to read Rake code.

If `rake -W` isn't helping you find source, or you don't have a
specific command to look for, you can generally find Rake tasks in the
following locations:

* The Rakefile at the root of your project
* Files ending in ".rake" within the `rakelib/` directory underneath
  the root of your project
* Files ending in ".rake" within the `lib/tasks/` directory (if you're
  using Rails)
* Embedded within gems that you're using. These are usually the most
  obscure to track down only because they aren't explicitly defined
  nearby.

### What is going on here?

Once you do manage to track down the definition of a rake task or two,
the first time you read through Rakefiles there's an element of
mystery.

It can be a rather terse DSL, which you'll probably come to appreciate
over time, but initially, leaves you thinking "What just happened?"

Be sure to watch the videos above (with an eye for `FileList`s and the
`file` and `directory` tasks) and remember to hang in there.

# FileLists are Bananas

One specific piece of Rake mystery has to do with things that commonly
appear in all UPPERCASE, like `CLEAN` and `CLOBBER`.

These are constants in Ruby, but are commonly constant references to
FileLists in Rakefiles.

FileLists allows you to describe a set of files, and new instances of
it are commonly created with `[]` rather than an explicit `.new`:

{% highlight ruby %}
IMAGE_FILES = FileList['images/*.png']
FileList['images/*.png', 'images/*.jpg']
FileList['images/**/.png']
FileList['images/**/.{png,jpg}']
{% endhighlight %}

Once you've got one, you can modify the list of files that it
references with incremental includes and excludes:

{% highlight ruby %}
IMAGE_FILES.include("*.jpg") to add *.jpg files to the list
IMAGE_FILES.exclude("*thumb*") to exclude files containing thumb
{% endhighlight %}

And then you can map from one FileList to another (say, by adding
something to the path of each involved file or tweaking file
extensions). This mapping is powered by `pathmap` and is a common
basis for batch moving or renaming of files.

At any rate, don't slug through this stuff: the path to happiness here
is to watch the videos and then follow this link through to the
documentation: [file-list-rdoc]

# Other Things to Note

Many people have written oodles about Rake.

Rather than go down that path again, I'll stop and say that sooner or
later you you should check out:

* How Rake handles accessing environment variables, specifically how
  it simulates `ENV['NAME']` if you write run this `rake blah
  NAME=value`

* How Rake handles global Rakefiles (tasks that live outside of any
  given project) via `rake -g`

# In Closing

Rake has been around for a long time, and there's a bunch to learn.

However, you can get started initially with just a few hours and this
investment will pay itself off within a week or two, and then only
keep paying dividends.

Because it's so well known, a number of tools claim that they are
easier to understand because they follow a 'rake like syntax.'

This means taking the time to understand Rake now has other, non-rake
benefits as well.

## Resources

* [Basic Rake Video on Confreaks][basic-rake-video]
* [Power Rake Video on Confreaks][power-rake-video]
* [Wikipedia for Rake][wikipedia-rake]
* [Stuart Ellis's 'Using Rake to Automate Tasks'][stuart-ellis-rake]

[basic-rake-video]: http://confreaks.com/videos/899-railsconf2012-basic-rake
[power-rake-video]: http://confreaks.com/videos/988-goruco2012-power-rake
[file-list-rdoc]: http://rake.rubyforge.org/classes/Rake/FileList.html
[wikipedia-rake]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rake_%28software%29
[stuart-ellis-rake]: http://www.stuartellis.eu/articles/rake/
