---
layout: post
title: Slate
category: posts
---

# Overview

* What [Slate][slate], does, and
* Why you should try it today, and
* How to make it happen in less than 10-15 minutes.

Managing windows is an integral part of almost all computer sessions:
you switch between them, change how large your windows are are, and
(if you're super lucky) move them between different displays.

Slate is Window Management Application.

Slate provides configurable key bindings that give you control over
your windows. With a single key press, you can switch between
applications, make windows change to a certain size, or jump between
displays.

If you're not already using an application that provides these
benefits, you should check out
[this write-up I created for getting started with Slate][getting-started-with-slate].

# Why should you care about this?

You might not. But..

## Window Management takes time

If you're not using an application like [Slate][slate], try counting
up the amount of time you spend switching between, and managing,
windows.

Switching between applications or changing the size of a window
necessarily requires you to stop your train of thought and engage in a
trivial and error prone task.

The total time isn't bad: 2 seconds, maybe 5 seconds if you make a
mistake, but you do this every day, dozens or maybe even hundreds of
times.

No one benefits from this. Not the designer. Not the developer. Not
the writer. Not the artist. Not the scientist.

What's the alternative?

With a little work, you can make window management as second nature
for you as typing is. Once you learn to type, you don't think about
typing: your fingers start going and words appear.

The same can be true for everything to do with windows: soon you'll be
in a situation where you start typing and windows start flying around.

If you're still not sold,

## Presentations take a whole lot of focus

When you are giving a presentation and your computer is displaying
something on a big screen in front of a dozen or more people, you
likely want to concentrate on your presentation and its content.

In particular, you don't want to lose any of your focus cycling
between applications, moving windows around, or manually adjusting
their size so that everything fits on the screen. Especially not in
front of 10 people. Or 20. Or 100.

## Next Steps

If you're willing to give Slate a try, I recommend starting with a
write-up I made called
[Getting started with Slate][getting-started-with-slate]. I'm
suggesting this path because there are a bunch of configuration
options and I initially found them overwhelming.

The idea of this write-up is that it should get you up and running in
15 minutes. If it doesn't, send me an email on where I went wrong and
I'll see if I can help you out.

If Slate doesn't seem right for you, but you are interested in window
management, then start googling around for alternatives. There are a
bunch of them and many have really slick user interfaces and videos
showing exactly what you can accomplish.

Either way- hopefully you'll check this out: I couldn't go back to
working without it.

## Resources

* You can search for
  ['slate'][ycombinator-search-slate] or
  ['window manager'][ycombinator-search-window-manager] on Hacker News.

* Slate isn't the only window manager in town. I've also heard good
  things about [Size-Up][sizeup] and [Divvy][divvy].

[slate]: https://github.com/jigish/slate
[divvy]: http://mizage.com/divvy/
[sizeup]: http://www.irradiatedsoftware.com/sizeup/
[ycombinator-search-slate]: https://www.google.com/search?q=site%3Anews.ycombinator.com+slate
[ycombinator-search-window-manager]: https://www.google.com/search?q=site%3Anews.ycombinator.com+window+manager
[getting-started-with-slate]: https://github.com/jedcn/getting-started-with-slate
